docs: flowchart and tables for differences between plugins, themes, and starters (#21659)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/plugins-themes-and-starters.md

- [Starter library](/starters/)
- [Creating a starter](/docs/creating-a-starter/)
- [Converting a starter to a theme](/docs/themes/converting-a-starter/)

## Comparing differences

Once you have a conceptual understanding of what a plugin, theme, and starter is, you may ask yourself what each is suited for in relation to each other.

The following tables put plugins, themes, and starters side-by-side, showing what each is more appropriate for.

> **Legend**

Reviewer: I think the legend could benefit from a description column for each of those keys as well. What do we mean by configurable in this context?

| Icon | Feature Capability    |
| ---- | --------------------- |
| ●    | Fully configurable    |
| ◐    | Somewhat configurable |
| ○    | Not configurable      |

### Differences in maintainability

When it comes to maintaining a Gatsby site, plugins and themes offer a distinct advantage to starters by being distributed as packages, making pulling in upstream changes in multiple Gatsby sites as easy as a new install.

| Maintenance        | Plugin | Theme | Starter |
| ------------------ | ------ | ----- | ------- |
| Versioning         | ●      | ●     | ●       |
| Install as Package | ●      | ●     | ○       |

> #### Versioning

Reviewer 2: I had troubles understanding what Versioning means in this context. At first I didn't agree with Starter being "Fully configurable". After reading the description I do.

Author: Yeah true, maybe I should change that to the half filled circle since it's not exactly the same kind of thing for a package vs your own site.

> Starters can still be versioned inside a repository so that you could track issues or bugs associated with specific developments in the starter but it's more difficult to make updates with new changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starters can still be versioned inside a repository so that you can track issues or bugs associated with specific developments in the starter but it's more difficult to make updates with new changes.
```

#### Installing as a package

Because starters are "ejected" each time they are used, it's difficult to sync changes across multiple sites derived from the same starter. This problem was one of the motivating factors in developing the newer concept of themes for Gatsby. You can read more about why themes were developed in the [What are Gatsby Themes guide](/docs/themes/what-are-gatsby-themes/#gatsby-starters).

### Differences in configurability

> Plugins and themes can expose a varying level of an API surface (meaning a piece of the plugin or theme that a user of it can interact with), constraining what is possible and providing sensible defaults to make them easier to start picking up and using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins and themes can expose varying levels of an API surface (meaning a piece of the plugin or theme that a user of it can interact with), constraining what is possible and providing sensible defaults to make them easier to start picking up and using.
```

Not sure if this is the right recommendation. Found this sentence a bit confusing.

Author: Yeah it doesn't read super great 🤔 I'll try and rework it, it's pretty long winded.

| Configuration         | Plugin | Theme | Starter |
| --------------------- | ------ | ----- | ------- |
| Shadowing             | ◐      | ●     | ○       |
| Uses Multiple Plugins | ◐      | ●     | ●       |
| Custom components     | ◐      | ●     | ●       |

#### Shadowing

> The options exposed by a plugin or theme are up to the author. For example, a plugin or theme can allow a specific path to be provided in the `gatsby-config` so the plugin knows where to build pages from. In this case the user wouldn't be able adjust _how_ those pages are built, only from what path. As an escape hatch to change small pieces of an installed theme, [shadowing](/docs/themes/shadowing/) was introduced. Theme shadowing allows users to replace a file with their own version of it. Because themes are also plugins, shadowing is possible in plugins as well.

Reviewer: Are all plugins shadowable or only some? My impressions was theme-ui is a bit unique?

Author: Yeah, here's the thread where I asked about this in Slack: https://gatsbyjs.slack.com/archives/CBQAWE7M2/p1580861936017300 

Really, I'm not aware of any difference between plugins and themes except for how they are conceptually understood.

Reviewer: Gotcha, so I think this actually goes to the point below. Is there a way to do a section explicitly focused on the technical differences by convention. And then the other stuff is the limitations/uses.

Author: Do you mean adding another section (like h2 level) to summarize how they are different before doing comparisons? Would you suggest changing the headers? I guess I'm not clear on what structure isn't working and what would improve it.

Reviewer: So this is just a potential option. But my current view is that some of the differences end up being repeated through out each section because they apply in all of those places. Mainly, a theme being a plugin and the main difference being convention of naming and usage. And then a starter being a snapshot in time that doesn't get updated. 

Those pieces of information are covered in other sections but my read is that they're important for framing everything. 

I think there are two options, though I'm open to other suggestions.
1. Make it another h2 before this comparing differences section called "Technical Intent and Associated Conventions", or something better than that.
2. Under the comparing differences section make the first h3 an overview of those pieces of information that help frame the other consideration. Something like "Overarching Considerations".

Let me know if that helps clarify things. And my apologies for not making the suggestions directly in the PR - given the high level architecture considerations I wasn't sure that would add any clarity.

Author: Great points! That's super helpful, and I understand why you can't make that a specific suggestion in the PR. I'll make some broader changes to that structure the way you've suggested 👍

Author: Okay, thanks @laurieontech I did a couple things:

- added an additional h2 that gave the context that plugins/themes are technically the same, but distinct by how they are intended to be used
- reworded the h3's to add in the word considerations
- removed (or moved up into overviews) redundant stuff about plugins being like themes, or starters being ejected

Let me know if this seems clear enough or if there is more that should be done!

An example of a plugin that uses shadowing is [`gatsby-plugin-theme-ui`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-theme-ui/?=theme-ui#customizing-the-theme) which allows you to shadow a theme file to use your own theme.

Starters aren't capable of shadowing (and they don't need to be), because a user of a starter can adjust any file by editing it directly.

#### Uses multiple plugins

Starters can be configured with multiple plugins so someone can get up and running without worrying about configuring too many loose ends. Themes are capable of the same by making a `gatsby-config` that a Gatsby site will run along with its own config. Plugins are also capable of this (because themes are a plugin), but it is recommended that _plugins be limited to their specific functionality_.

#### Custom components

> Custom components are most traditionally distributed as packages in the React ecosystem. Components don't need to hook into the Gatsby build system, so if shipped with a plugin don't need to be included in a `gatsby-config`'s plugin array. This is the case with `gatsby-image` which is a React component. It doesn't need to be included in the plugins array because it is merely a component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom components are most traditionally distributed as packages in the React ecosystem. Components don't need to hook into the Gatsby build system, so if shipped with a plugin they don't need to be included in a `gatsby-config`'s plugin array. This is the case with `gatsby-image` which is a React component. It doesn't need to be included in the plugins array because it is merely a component.
```

Some plugins and themes ship with components you can use in a Gatsby site. An example is the [`<OutboundLink />` component from `gatsby-plugin-google-analytics`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-google-analytics/?=#outboundlink-component). Other plugins, like [`gatsby-plugin-react-helmet`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-react-helmet), require you to install components from other dependent libraries.

> Because themes are meant to own a section of a site—like a page or part of page—they are more suited to ship with components that could then be shadowed for customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because themes are meant to own a section of a site—like a page or part of a page—they are more suited to ship with components that could then be shadowed for customization.
```

Themes are a type of plugin, making both themes and plugins capable of the same functionality. The difference between them is _intended usage_. Themes are intended to own a piece of the site (like an about us page), whereas a plugin is intended to modularize Gatsby APIs into smaller pieces. Themes tend to cover a broader scope of responsibility, packaging up multiple behaviors, where plugins are meant for more specific functionality.

Starters are generally used as the starting point that plugins and themes are then installed into. However, they're based on one-time use and do not get updated over time as plugins and themes do.

## Comparing differences

Once you have a conceptual understanding of what a plugin, theme, and starter is, you may ask yourself what each is suited for in relation to each other.

The following tables put plugins, themes, and starters side-by-side, showing what each is more appropriate for.

**Legend**

| Icon | Feature Capability                                                    |
| ---- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ●    | Fully capable (possible and supported)                                |

> | ◐    | Somewhat capable (not as recommended of a practice or less supported) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ◐    | Somewhat capable (support is minimal or it is not best practice) |
```

| ○    | Not capable                                                      |

### Differences and considerations in maintenance

> When it comes to maintaining a Gatsby site, plugins and themes offer a distinct advantage to starters by being distributed as packages. This means making changes in multiple Gatsby sites is as easy as a new install of an updated package upstream. It's difficult to sync changes across multiple sites derived from the same starter.

Reviewer 3: The phrase "plugins and themes offer a distinct advantage to starters" reads to me like you might choose to use a non-theme plugin rather than a starter to base your site on. Not a blocker as far as I'm concerned but something to think about.

Author: Yeah I think that would often be the case, to add configuration like linting and tooling to multiple sites. If you think there's a better way to reword this I'm happy to hear what you think! 👍

| Maintenance        | Plugin | Theme | Starter |
| ------------------ | ------ | ----- | ------- |
| Versioning         | ●      | ●     | ◐       |
| Install as Package | ●      | ●     | ○       |

#### Versioning

Starters can still be versioned inside of a repository so that you can track issues or bugs associated with specific updates, but they aren't formally released and published, so they aren't versioned like a plugin or theme is.

#### Installing as a package

> Starters can't be installed into existing sites, this problem was one of the motivating factors in developing the newer concept of themes. You can read more about the rationale for themes in the [What are Gatsby Themes guide](/docs/themes/what-are-gatsby-themes/#gatsby-starters).

Reviewer 3: _Was_ this a problem? Doesn't seem like they were ever designed to work that way.

```suggestion
Starters can't be installed into existing sites, this limitation was one of the motivating factors in developing the newer concept of themes. You can read more about the rationale for themes in the [What are Gatsby Themes guide](/docs/themes/what-are-gatsby-themes/#gatsby-starters).
```

### Differences and considerations in configuration

Plugins and themes can expose options to make them configurable for users. There are different possibilities for configuration like passing in options and shadowing files that make plugins and themes more powerful—but also more complicated—than starters. Because themes are also plugins, shadowing is possible in plugins as well. It may make sense for a plugin to take advantage of the shadowing API, but it is less common.

| Configuration         | Plugin | Theme | Starter |
| --------------------- | ------ | ----- | ------- |
| Pass in Options       | ●      | ●     | ◐       |
| Shadowing             | ◐      | ●     | ○       |
| Uses Multiple Plugins | ◐      | ●     | ●       |
| Custom components     | ◐      | ●     | ●       |

#### Pass in Options

Plugins and themes both allow options to be passed in when installed in the plugins array of a `gatsby-config`. Starters can be set up with documented options for customization, but there are no officially supported options for starters apart from what the author of the starter decides to write.

#### Shadowing

> Theme, [shadowing](/docs/themes/shadowing/) exists to allow users to override or otherwise extend individual components provided by a theme. For example, a plugin or theme can provide a specific path to `gatsby-config` so the plugin knows where to build pages from, but the user wouldn't be able adjust _how_ those pages are built, only from what path. Theme shadowing allows users to replace a file with their own version of it, allowing them to rewrite that logic to use the path in a different way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Theme [shadowing](/docs/themes/shadowing/) exists to allow users to override or otherwise extend individual components provided by a theme. For example, a plugin or theme can provide a specific path to `gatsby-config` so the plugin knows where to build pages from, but the user wouldn't be able adjust _how_ those pages are built, only from what path. Theme shadowing allows users to replace a file with their own version of it, allowing them to rewrite that logic to use the path in a different way.
```

> An example of a plugin that uses shadowing is [`gatsby-plugin-theme-ui`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-theme-ui/?=theme-ui#customizing-the-theme) which allows you to shadow a theme file to use your own theme.

Reviewer 3: The phrase " which allows you to shadow a theme file to use your own theme" feels like it's missing a word. "... to use _in_ your own theme"?

Starters aren't capable of shadowing (and they don't need to be), because a user of a starter can adjust any file by editing it directly.

#### Uses multiple plugins

Themes are intended to abstract several plugins into one, by making a `gatsby-config` that a Gatsby site will run along with its own config. Starters can also be configured with multiple plugins so someone can get up and running without worrying about configuring too many loose ends.

#### Custom components

Custom components are most traditionally distributed as packages in the React ecosystem. Components don't need to hook into the Gatsby build system, so if shipped with a plugin they don't need to be included in a `gatsby-config`'s plugin array. This is the case with `gatsby-image` which is a React component. It doesn't need to be included in the plugins array because it is merely a component.

> Some plugins ship with components you can use in a Gatsby site. An example is the [`<OutboundLink />` component from `gatsby-plugin-google-analytics`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-google-analytics/?=#outboundlink-component). Other plugins, like [`gatsby-plugin-react-helmet`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-react-helmet), require you to install components from other dependent libraries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some plugins ship with components you can use in a Gatsby site. An example is the [`<OutboundLink />` component from `gatsby-plugin-google-analytics`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-google-analytics/?=#outboundlink-component). Other plugins, like [`gatsby-plugin-react-helmet`](/packages/gatsby-plugin-react-helmet), require you to install components from other libraries.
```

This sounds like the libraries are dependent on your project or the plugin when it's the other way around.

- [Creating a starter](/docs/creating-a-starter/)
- [Converting a starter to a theme](/docs/themes/converting-a-starter/)

## Conventions for usage

> Themes are a type of plugin, making both themes and plugins capable of the same functionality. The difference between them is the _intent for their usage_. Themes are intended to own a piece of the site (like an about us page), whereas a plugin is intended to modularize Gatsby APIs into smaller pieces. Themes tend to cover a broader scope of responsibility, packaging up multiple behaviors, where plugins are meant for a narrower use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Themes are a type of plugin, making both themes and plugins capable of the same functionality. The difference between them is _intented usage_. Themes are intended to own a piece of the site (like an about us page), whereas a plugin is intended to modularize Gatsby APIs into smaller pieces. Themes tend to cover a broader scope of responsibility, packaging up multiple behaviors, where plugins are meant for more specific functionality.
```
Not sold on my edit for the last sentence. I know what we're trying to say, but it's tough to explain.

> Starters are generally used as the starting point that plugins and themes are then installed into.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starters are generally used as the starting point that plugins and themes are then installed into. However, they're based on one-time use and do not get updated over time as plugins and themes do.
```

#### Versioning

> Starters can still be versioned inside of a repository so that you can track issues or bugs associated with specific developments, but they aren't formally released in publishes marked by versions like a plugin or theme is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starters can still be versioned inside of a repository so that you can track issues or bugs associated with specific updates, but they aren't formally released and published, so they aren't versioned like a plugin or theme is.
```

#### Shadowing

> As an escape hatch to change small pieces of an installed theme, [shadowing](/docs/themes/shadowing/) was introduced. For example, a plugin or theme could allow a specific path to be provided in the `gatsby-config` so the plugin knows where to build pages from, but the user wouldn't be able adjust _how_ those pages are built, only from what path. Theme shadowing allows users to replace a file with their own version of it, allowing them to rewrite that logic to use the path in a different way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Theme, [shadowing](/docs/themes/shadowing/) exists to allow users to override or otherwise extend individual components provided by a theme. For example, a plugin or theme can provide a specific path to `gatsby-config` so the plugin knows where to build pages from, but the user wouldn't be able adjust _how_ those pages are built, only from what path. Theme shadowing allows users to replace a file with their own version of it, allowing them to rewrite that logic to use the path in a different way.
```
